http://www.chessvariants.com/historic.dir/enochian.html

Enochian chess, an interesting variation on Chaturanga for Four Players, 
also has its origins in a particular subculture, in this case the world 
of Victorian occultists.

Enochian chess first appears to have been played by members of the Order 
of the Golden Dawn, who used their boards and pieces for divination as 
well as gameplay. Documentary evidence for the existence of the game (in 
the form of a Golden Dawn paper dating from no later than 1897) has come 
to light, but no historical documents discovered so far have given the 
complete rules for game play. Nobel Prize-winning poet and Golden Dawn 
member William Butler Yeats (1865-1939) records in his memoirs that in 
1894 he played "a curious form of chess at which there should be four 
players" with two other members of the Golden Dawn. One of the other 
players was MacGregor Mathers (1854-1918), a founding father of the 
order. In his book The Golden Dawn noted occultist Israel Regardie 
(1907-1985) provides a description of the boards and the pieces used in 
Enochian chess. He also gives two arrays and the occult methodology 
whereby the others may be derived. Regardie attributes part of the 
information he provides, including the movement of the pieces, to an 
"Official Ritual" written by Mathers.

The Golden Dawn considered Enochian chess to be a secret teaching. At 
least partially because of this veil of secrecy, authorship of this 
variant is unclear. Golden Dawn founder Dr. Wynn Westcott (1848-1925) 
has been suggested as the inventor of this particular variant, but some 
(including Westcott himself) have claimed that the documents describing 
Enochian chess were among those supplied to him from an older occult 
group operating in Germany. The complete rules presented here are based 
upon a modern reconstruction by Golden Dawn student Chris Zalewski.

The magical practices of the Golden Dawn are of no concern to the chess 
variant community, so this essay will focus on Enochian chess as a game. 
Information of an occult nature will be omitted or glossed-over wherever 
possible.

Board
Enochian chess can be played on the 8x8 board of FIDE chess. (Golden 
Dawn members did not use orthodox boards. For more information on the 
traditional equipment used to play this variant, see Appendix I.) 
However, play is facilitated by making the corner spaces of the board at 
least twice as large as the other squares. After some experimentation 
the author of this essay found the following board to be particularly 
suitable:

The Board
Figure 1: Board

The four corner spaces (a1, a8, h1, h8) are the throne squares and have 
special properties involving the four kings that will be explained 
below.
Setup
Each of the four players begins with a king, a queen, a rook, a knight, 
a bishop and four special pawns. Enochian Chess allows for eight 
different initial arrangements of these pieces, each designated by 
reference to a combination of the classical 4 elements (fire, earth, 
water & air). One such array, "Air of Air & Water", is given below. For 
the others see Appendix II.

One Possible Setup
Figure 2: One Possible Setup

YELLOW 	king & bishop, a8
queen, b8
knight, c8
rook, d8 	pawn of bishop, a7
pawn of queen, b7
pawn of knight, c7
pawn of rook, d7

BLUE 	king & bishop, h8
queen, h7
knight, h6
rook, h5 	pawn of bishop, g8
pawn of queen, g7
pawn of knight, g6
pawn of rook, g5

RED 	king & bishop, h1
queen, g1
knight, f1
rook, e1 	pawn of bishop, h2
pawn of queen, g2
pawn of knight, f2
pawn of rook, e2

BLACK 	king & bishop, a1
queen, a2
knight, a3
rook, a4 	pawn of bishop, b1
pawn of queen, b2
pawn of knight, b3
pawn of rook, b4

In all eight initial arrangements each throne square is occupied by two 
pieces, a king and another piece (in the above case a bishop). This 
double occupancy is only allowed at the beginning of the game. Once 
either the king or the other piece moves off of the throne square then 
for the remainder of the game only one piece may sit on that particular 
throne square at any one time. Both pieces are captured if an enemy 
piece moves into a throne square while it is still occupied by the both 
original pieces.

Pieces
The king moves one step in any direction as in FIDE chess. More 
information concerning the king may be found in the Rules section.

The queen moves by leaping two squares in any direction, as would an 
alibaba. The movement of a queen is illustrated in Figure 3. The queen 
has a special form of capture only allowed against other queens. For 
more information on this special case, see Rules.

Queen's Leap
Figure 3: Queen's Leap

The rook moves orthogonally as in FIDE chess. Castling is not allowed in 
Enochian chess.

The bishop moves diagonally as in FIDE chess, except that like the queen 
it has a special form of capture only allowed against other bishops. 
More information on this can be found in the Rules section.

The knight behaves exactly as it does in FIDE chess.

The four classes of pawn (pawn of queen, pawn of rook, pawn of bishop, 
and pawn of knight) behave much like FIDE pawns, moving one space 
forward or capturing one space in the forward diagonal. For yellow, 
"forward" constitutes movement towards row 1. For blue, forward movement 
is in the direction of column A. Red pawns move towards row 8 amd black 
pawns toward column H. Upon reaching the far rank/file, pawns can 
promote as in FIDE chess, except that promotion of pawns only occurs 
after a player has lost at least one pawn. Promotion must be delayed if 
all four of a player's pawn are uncaptured. Also, a pawn may only 
promote to its type. (A pawn of rook promotes to a rook, a pawn of 
knight promote to a knight, etc.) Furthermore, pawns are not allowed an 
initial double step.

Notes
Neither the original Golden Dawn material nor Zalewski's reconstruction 
use the "pawn of ..." terminology. Both simply refer to these pieces as 
pawns. The nomenclature has been adapted from Tamerlane chess in an 
attempt to clarify the promotion rules.

Although Zalewski's reconstruction of the rules for Enochian chess may 
be sound, the author of this article cannot help but wonder if in an 
earlier version perhaps the queen and bishop moved more like their 
Chaturanga counterparts, i.e. the queen as a ferz (one square 
diagonally)and the bishop as an alfil (leaping 2 squares diagonally). 
Such a suggestion is merely speculation on the part of this essayist. 
Regardie and through him Mathers both support Zalewski's descriptions of 
the queen and bishop.

Rules
Summary

Enochian chess is a four player chess variant in which two teams (always 
blue & black versus red & yellow) strive to capture both kings of the 
opposing team.

Before Play Begins

Prior to the start of a game the players should choose which of the 
eight arrays they will use. The players will also need to determine what 
color each will play (thereby determining who will be on which team) and 
what color will go first. (The Golden Dawn had a special procedure for 
making these determinations that had no substantive impact on play. For 
a description of this procedure, see Appendix IV.) Once these issues are 
settled play may proceed, going clockwise around the board.

Team Play

There is no individual winner in Enochian chess. For example, if the 
blue army is eliminated from play and the black army goes on to the 
capture the red and yellow kings, then the team of blue and black have 
won the game.

Team members are normally forbidden from capturing each other's pieces, 
unless otherwise noted. Pieces belonging to armies on the same team do 
not threaten each other. (E.g. The blue and black kings can be adjacent 
without giving each other check.)

Capture of the King

Kings are not mated in Enochian chess, though players must warn their 
opponents that the king is threatend by declaring "check" as in FIDE 
chess. A king in check MUST be moved, even if that means putting the 
king in check again. The player with the king in check may move another 
piece only if the king is blocked by friendly pieces so that it cannot 
be moved out of check.

When a king is captured all the pieces of that color become frozen. They 
remain on the board, but are unable to move, do not threaten other 
pieces, nor can they be captured. They simply sit on the board acting as 
blocking terrain.

Seizing the Throne

Moving the king onto the throne square of a friendly player transfers 
control of the friendly army. The two armies still take separate turns, 
but are under the control of one player. Frozen pieces may be 
reactivated by this method. The player retains control of both armies 
even if the king that seized control is moved off of the throne square. 
If the usurping king is captured, control of the friendly army reverts 
to the original player, assuming that the army still has a king to lead 
it. Otherwise both armies are kingless and those players have lost the 
game.

Exchange of Prisoners

Two opposing players who have both captured enemy kings may agree to an 
exchange of prisoners. The exchange can only be made if both players 
with captured kings agree and neither have lost their own king. The 
kings are placed upon their own throne squares, or if a throne square is 
occupied, the nearest empty square. Zalewski does not indicate how to 
place a king if the thrones square is occupied and multiple alternative 
squares are equidistant from the throne square.

Frozen pieces revert to normal pieces when their king is brought back 
into play in this manner.

Priviledged Pawn

If a player is reduced to a king, a queen, and a pawn; a king, a bishop, 
and a pawn or a king and a pawn, then the pawn is considered to be 
priviledged. Upon reaching its normal promotion zone a priviledged pawn 
may be promoted to a queen, rook, bishop, or knight as the player 
chooses. In effect, the pawn becomes a normal FIDE pawn. However, if a 
priviledged pawn is promoted to a piece still in play, the original 
piece is demoted to the pawn of its type. This effect is illustrated by 
Figures 4 and 5.

Before Using Pawn Privilege
Figure 4: Before Using Pawn Privilege

Black has a pawn of bishop ready to promote and sees an opportunity to 
fork red's king and rook. Since the pawn of bishop is priviledged, black 
chooses promotes to a queen. Black already has a queen on the board, 
which is demoted to a pawn of queen.

After Using Pawn Privilege
Figure 5: After Using Pawn Privilege

What would happen if the above scenario were to involve a pawn of queen 
instead of a pawn of rook? Zalewski is unclear on this point, but it 
could be guessed that the original queen can avoid demotion, allowing 
two black queens on the board. Otherwise the player would be penalized 
for having priviledge.

Concourse of Bishoping

A perusal of the eight possible arrays reveals that opposing bishops are 
bound on opposite colors. The special case known as the concourse of 
bishoping allows bishops to capture enemy bishops. The concourse of 
bishoping is similar to the triumph of the boat found in Chaturanga for 
Four Players. By completing a 2x2 square formation involving all four 
bishops, the moving bishop takes all three other bishops. A concourse is 
a special case in which capturing a teammate's piece is legal.

Concourse of Bishoping
Figure 6: Concourse of Bishoping

In Figure 6 above if the black bishop were to move to e4 it would 
complete the concourse, capturing all three of the other bishops. Unlike 
the triumph of the boat, the concourse maneuver is legal in only five 
positions on the board. A concourse can happen either at c4, c5, d4, & 
d5 as illustrated above and at the sets (b2, b3, c2, c3) or (b6, b7, c6, 
c7) or (f6, f7, g6, g7) or (f2, f3, g2, g3). The other four concourse 
locations are illustrated by Figure 7.

The Other Four Concourses
Figure 7: The Other Four Concourses

Concourse of Queens

Opposing queens are also bound on opposite colors. A concourse of queens 
occurs under exactly the same circumstances as a concourse of bishoping. 
Bishops and queens may not be combined in a single concourse capture. 
All pieces involved must be either bishops OR queens.

Bare King

When two players on the same team are both reduced to bare kings the 
game is a draw.

Withdrawing

A player may withdraw from the game at any time, leaving their pieces in 
command of their teammate. If the withdrawing player has only a bare 
king, the remaining teammate is allowed to move either the bare king or 
their own pieces on BOTH colors' turns. If any other pieces remain in 
the army of the withdrawing player, then each color army may only be 
moved on its own turn.

Stalemate

If a player has no move available except such that would put their 
unchecked king into check, that player is stalemated. Play continues, 
but the player is not allowed to take a turn until such time as a move 
by another player alleviates the stalemate condition. The game is drawn 
if a player is stalemated and their teammate is also currently out of 
the game (teammate also stalemated, teammate's king captured, teammate 
withdrawn or the stalemated king has seized a friendly throne).

Two or Three Player Games Enochian chess may be played with fewer than 
four players by having one or both players command two armies. Each 
color still receives its own turn and pieces cannot be played out of 
turn. (E.g. If one player is playing both red and yellow, no red pieces 
may be moved during the yellow turn unless the yellow army has taken 
control of the red army.) A player operating both armies may not 
withdraw as described above.

Bibliography
Howe, Ellic. The Magicians of the Golden Dawn. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, 1972.

Regardie, Israel. The Golden Dawn. St. Paul: Llewellyn Publications, 
1989.

Yeats, W(illiam) B(utler). Memoirs trans. and edited by Denis Donoghue. 
New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1973.

Zalewski, Chris. Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn. St. Paul: Llewellyn 
Publications, 1994.

(Please note that off the four texts listed above, only Regardie and 
Zalewski will be of any possible use to the chess variantist. The others 
are cited only to help establish the historical pedigree for Enochian 
chess.)

Appendix I: Traditional Enochian Chess Equipment
The Air Board
Figure 8: The Air Board 	Enochian chess was traditionally played 
on one of four specially constructed boards. Each board represented on 
of the classical elements. Each square of each board was divided into 4 
triangles, which were painted one of four different colors. These 
triangles were not game spaces themselves, merely components of the 
larger square cells used to play the game. Although confusing to the 
eye, an Enochian chessboard is functionally identical to a FIDE 8x8 
board.
The pieces used in Enochian chess were generally stiff paper stand-ups 
much like the paper dolls and paper toy soldiers of the era. Each major 
piece had a unique name and design taken from Egyptian mythology and all 
the pieces were painted in four-color paint schemes. Figure 9 depicts 
the front of an example piece. Each piece was mounted upright on a base 
colored red, yellow, blue, or black to show its affiliation. The back of 
the pieces were each painted a solid color depending on piece type: 
Kings were painted white on the reverse. Knights were red. Queens were 
painted blue. Bishops were yellow and rooks were black. 	Horus, 
the black knight
Figure 9: Horus, the black knight
Appendix II: Alternate Arrays
The setup described in the main body of this essay is one of eight 
provided by Zalewski. The seven other possible set-ups are given below. 
All eight are equally valid arrays, with no preference given between 
them. Regardie indicates that there are 16 possible arrays, but Zalewski 
concludes that there are only eight arrays because there are eight pairs 
of arrays that are functionally identical. For example, the arrays "Air 
of Fire" and "Air of Earth" have the exact same piece arrangement. 
Therefore these two arrays are listed below under a single category, 
"Air of Fire & Earth".

Air of Fire & Earth
Figure 10: Air of Fire & Earth

YELLOW 	king & bishop, a8
rook, b8
knight, c8
queen, d8 	pawn of bishop, a7
pawn of rook, b7
pawn of knight, c7
pawn of queen, d7

BLUE 	king & bishop, h8
rook, h7
knight, h6
queen, h5 	pawn of bishop, g8
pawn of rook, g7
pawn of knight, g6
pawn of queen, g5

RED 	king & bishop, h1
rook, g1
knight, f1
queen, e1 	pawn of bishop, h2
pawn of rook, g2
pawn of knight, f2
pawn of queen, e2

BLACK 	king & bishop, a1
rook, a2
knight, a3
queen, a4 	pawn of bishop, b1
pawn of rook, b2
pawn of knight, b3
pawn of queen, b4

Fire of Air & Water
Figure 11: Fire of Air & Water

YELLOW 	king & knight, a8
rook, b8
bishop, c8
queen, d8 	pawn of knight, a7
pawn of rook, b7
pawn of bishop, c7
pawn of queen, d7

BLUE 	king & knight, h8
rook, h7
bishop, h6
queen, h5 	pawn of knight, g8
pawn of rook, g7
pawn of bishop, g6
pawn of queen, g5

RED 	king & knight, h1
rook, g1
bishop, f1
queen, e1 	pawn of knight, h2
pawn of rook, g2
pawn of bishop, f2
pawn of queen, e2

BLACK 	king & knight, a1
rook, a2
bishop, a3
queen, a4 	pawn of knight, b1
pawn of rook, b2
pawn of bishop, b3
pawn of queen, b4

Water of Air & Water
Figure 12: Water of Air & Water

YELLOW 	king & queen, a8
bishop, b8
rook, c8
knight, d8 	pawn of queen, a7
pawn of bishop, b7
pawn of rook, c7
pawn of knight, d7

BLUE 	king & queen, h8
bishop, h7
rook, h6
knight, h5 	pawn of queen, g8
pawn of bishop, g7
pawn of rook, g6
pawn of knight, g5

RED 	king & queen, h1
bishop, g1
rook, f1
knight, e1 	pawn of queen, h2
pawn of bishop, g2
pawn of rook, f2
pawn of knight, e2

BLACK 	king & queen, a1
bishop, a2
rook, a3
knight, a4 	pawn of queen, b1
pawn of bishop, b2
pawn of rook, b3
pawn of knight, b4

Earth of Fire & Earth
Figure 13: Earth of Fire & Earth

YELLOW 	king & rook, a8
bishop, b8
queen, c8
knight, d8 	pawn of rook, a7
pawn of bishop, b7
pawn of queen, c7
pawn of knight, d7

BLUE 	king & rook, h8
bishop, h7
queen, h6
knight, h5 	pawn of rook, g8
pawn of bishop, g7
pawn of queen, g6
pawn of knight, g5

RED 	king & rook, h1
bishop, g1
queen, f1
knight, e1 	pawn of rook, h2
pawn of bishop, g2
pawn of queen, f2
pawn of knight, e2

BLACK 	king & rook, a1
bishop, a2
queen, a3
knight, a4 	pawn of rook, b1
pawn of bishop, b2
pawn of queen, b3
pawn of knight, b4

Earth of Air & Water
Figure 14: Earth of Air & Water

YELLOW 	king & rook, a8
knight, b8
queen, c8
bishop, d8 	pawn of rook, a7
pawn of knight, b7
pawn of queen, c7
pawn of bishop, d7

BLUE 	king & rook, h8
knight, h7
queen, h6
bishop, h5 	pawn of rook, g8
pawn of knight, g7
pawn of queen, g6
pawn of bishop, g5

RED 	king & rook, h1
knight, g1
queen, f1
bishop, e1 	pawn of rook, h2
pawn of knight, g2
pawn of queen, f2
pawn of bishop, e2

BLACK 	king & rook, a1
knight, a2
queen, a3
bishop, a4 	pawn of rook, b1
pawn of knight, b2
pawn of queen, b3
pawn of bishop, b4

Fire of Fire & Earth
Figure 15: Fire of Fire & Earth

YELLOW 	king & knight, a8
queen, b8
bishop, c8
rook, d8 	pawn of knight, a7
pawn of queen, b7
pawn of bishop, c7
pawn of rook, d7

BLUE 	king & knight, h8
queen, h7
bishop, h6
rook, h5 	pawn of knight, g8
pawn of queen, g7
pawn of bishop, g6
pawn of rook, g5

RED 	king & knight, h1
queen, g1
bishop, f1
rook, e1 	pawn of knight, h2
pawn of queen, g2
pawn of bishop, f2
pawn of rook, e2

BLACK 	king & knight, a1
queen, a2
bishop, a3
rook, a4 	pawn of knight, b1
pawn of queen, b2
pawn of bishop, b3
pawn of rook, b4

Water of Fire & Earth
Figure 16: Water of Fire & Earth

YELLOW 	king & queen, a8
knight, b8
rook, c8
bishop, d8 	pawn of queen, a7
pawn of knight, b7
pawn of rook, c7
pawn of bishop, d7

BLUE 	king & queen, h8
knight, h7
rook, h6
bishop, h5 	pawn of queen, g8
pawn of knight, g7
pawn of rook, g6
pawn of bishop, g5

RED 	king & queen, h1
knight, g1
rook, f1
bishop, e1 	pawn of queen, h2
pawn of knight, g2
pawn of rook, f2
pawn of bishop, e2

BLACK 	king & queen, a1
knight, a2
rook, a3
bishop, a4 	pawn of queen, b1
pawn of knight, b2
pawn of rook, b3
pawn of bishop, b4

Appendix III: Why "Enochian" Chess?
Enochian chess is named after the Biblical patriarch Enoch, father of 
Methusaleh. In an occult tradition going back at least to the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth I, Enoch is considered a source hidden mystical 
knowledge, for he "walked with God" (Genesis 5:24) and "was taken from 
this life, so that he did not experience death" (Hebrews 11:5).

Initially this chess variant was also called Rosicrucian chess, after 
the Order of the Rosy Cross, a continental mystic fraternity from which 
the Order of the Golden Dawn claimed descent.
Appendix IV: Traditional Starting Procedure
The first step to playing Enochian chess in the traditional manner is to 
select which of the four elemental boards will be used. This choice also 
determines which army moves first. On the air board yellow moves first. 
On the fire board red moves first. On the water board blue moves first. 
On the earth board black moves first.

The players then agree upon an array to be used. If playing on the fire 
or earth boards then only "... of fire & earth" arrays may be selected. 
If playing on the air or water boards then only "... of air & water" 
boards may be used.

Then players throw dice. In order from highest total to lowest each 
player in turn selects which army they will play, thereby determining 
their teams in the process.

(This dice method seems odd. The players with the second and third 
highest total on the dice determine the composition of the teams. The 
player who won the die roll gets the priviledge of choosing which army 
to operate (and whether or not that player gets the first move), but the 
"winner" is then at the mercy of others in regards to choosing a 
teammate.)

Final Note
Golden Dawn practioners may take this essay to task for the method of 
presentation used, whereby the mystical nature of Enochian chess has 
been stripped away wherever possible. No offense is intended. Nor is it 
the design of this essay to endorse or refute anyone's belief system. 
Enochian Chess has been submitted to the Chess Variant Pages so that it 
may take its rightful place in the broader outline of chess variant 
history. 

http://www.projectrho.com/rocket/rocket3ax.html

Enochian chess is basically a form of divination, that is, an attempt to 
foretell the future by magical means. Yes, this is more the realm of 
fantasy than science fiction, but is included for completeness. A 
magician (aka "Adept" ) poses a question. The category and nature of the 
question determines which of the four chessboards is used (Fire, Water, 
Air, or Earth), and which square on the board contains the question 
(that square is marked with a special chess piece called the "Ptath").

The game is then played to its conclusion. For each player's turn, the 
piece that is to be moved is determined by a throw of dice, but the 
piece selected is moved according to the will of the player (constrained 
by the movement rules for that piece of course). All pieces moved and 
the squares they land on are carefully recorded, as this reveals the 
future. The question is answered yes/no depending upon which kings get 
checkmated.

The boards use elemental magic theory, which maintains that instead of 
the universe being composed of the 117-odd chemical elements known to 
science, it is actually made of the occult elements Fire, Water, Air, 
and Earth. Hey, it's magic, OK? (Technically there is a fifth occult 
element "Spirit" or "Aethyr", but that can be ignored in Enochian chess. 
The fifth element is the origin of the word "quintessence" or "fifth 
essence").

Therefore, there are four chessboards, one for each element. Each board 
is divided into four quarters. So the upper left quadrant of the 
elemental Water chessboard is for the "Airy part of Water."

You see, according to elemental magic theory, everything is composed of 
the four elements. But "everything" includes the elements themselves. So 
the element of Fire is itself composed of Fire, Water, Air, and Earth. 
That is the Fiery part of Fire, the Watery part of Fire, and so on.

The quadrants are subdivided a couple of more times to get to the level 
of individual game squares. So a given square may be the watery part of 
the airy part of the earthy part of Air. This is why each square has 
four different colors, coding the elements. Each of the four elements of 
a square are tagged with a Tarot card, a Geomantic glyph, a Hebrew 
letter, and an astrological sign of the Zodiac. The profusion of 
mystical symbols paired with the identity of the chess piece landing on 
it somehow gives the magician knowledge of future events. Well, it 
certainly seems more precise than reading tea-leaves.

You will notice that the symbols are printed in the complementary color 
to the triangle color. This is called "counter-charging", a board 
colored in such a fashion is called a "flashing colors tablet." Former 
hippies who lived during the 1960's will recognize this as the same 
technique used in the neon-colored glow-in-the-dark op-art psychedelic 
posters common during that era. In both cases the motive was the same: 
to have a "mind-expanding" effect/look really, really cool while 
tripping on LSD.

The Enochian chess pieces are representations of various Egyptian gods 
and goddesses.

Enochian Chess comes from Enochian Magic (surprise, surprise), invented 
in the 16th-century by Dr. John Dee and developed further by the 
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn The underlying game appears to be a 
variant on Chaturaji, which some say is the ancestor of modern chess.

---
chess pieces:
http://www.alchemywebsite.com/e-chess.html
pawns:
http://www.alchemywebsite.com/e-pawns.html
